---
title: Typing
date: 2022-06-28
hero: /images/keyboardtyping.jpeg
excerpt: This is an essay on my journey of typing. 
timeToRead: 4
authors:
  - Kavin Sood

---

This is an essay on my journey of typing. 

Typing seems like a mundane activity. Nowadays, classes for learning typing etiquette is uncommon. Most people don’t think twice about the effect typing really has on their life and thus put little effort in their keyboards and skill.

Now more than ever, a lot of what we do in our lives indirectly depends on typing. It is the fundamental way we chose to interact with computers. This is a link of communication, and if we are efficient in the way we type, we can fluently and effortlessly communicate our thoughts and opinions over to the digital world. 

The more well versed you are at a language, the better you can interact with locals of that language. For a lot of us, learning proper typing can be a huge benefit to their lives. I made this realisation during the start of 2020. I found that my typing and reading speed directly impacted my academics and digital hobbies. So I got to work on it, and this is my journey.

I didn’t start out being average. From a young age, I was interested in computers and typed faster than my peers throughout the ages.

You have to go around, optimising your muscle memory for each aspect of perfect typing. The first is the layout. Learn to type all alphabets at once without looking at the keyboard@ and make mental data structures for words when typing them, almost like making the shape you get by glide typing something on your phone. Then comes the part of assigning the appropriate fingers to the keys. A rather lengthy process it is.

A very interesting, un-noticed aspect of switching to a new keyboard layout or learning the same layout again is that there is a middle period of about two to three weeks while learning when you are in the process of forgetting your previous muscle memory and building new neural links in your mind while learning the new layout, when your speed drops to the lowest. You typing is abysmal and dysfunctional. If out of necessity, you switch to your old habits, then you start to lose the benefits of the new process and would have to start over. There are several ways to combat this - learn typing at a time when you do not have much pressure and your work doesn’t demand, only use your phone for any typing tasks, use voice dictation or just have *very* understanding peers.