---
title: Why Windows
date: 2022-06-28
hero: /images/llugk8ad1ezx7ju4dq2p.webp
excerpt: Why do I use Windows when I love Linux? This isn’t about just praising Windows, oh no dear, it’s why I, me being the person I am, daily drives Windows.
timeToRead: 5
authors:
  - Kavin Sood

---

Why do I use Windows when I love Linux? This isn’t about just praising Windows, oh no dear, it’s why I, me being the person I am, daily drives Windows.

I am a huge Linux and FOSS fan. I’ve used everything from Debian, Arch, Fedora and their derivatives. I’ve used Pop OS, Manjaro, and Fedora as my primary OS without Windows in the past. I am enthusiastic and passionate on security and privacy. I read news of the latest developments in Wayland, DE’s, and the Linux Kernel, with all of that said, I’ve been a Windows user for quite some time and will continue to be one primarily. Here’s why:

1.  I have never felt like Windows was a buggy and messy OS. Sure, there are plenty examples of that online, but I personally have not experienced such. Windows is annoying, yes, but not **that** buggy. Over time, I’ve mastered how to maintain a Windows installation perfectly and have always had a wonderful experience with the OS. I’ve learnt to identify malicious software, PUPs and adware, can keep my install clean and secure without the need of a third party antivirus and don’t face crashes with system apps. Windows allows me to enjoy _using_ my PC. Linux is something I like fiddling with, but wouldn’t have time to do so in the future. In such a case, I would want to use my PC instead of tinkering with it in my spare time. Not to say that Linux can’t be stable and is only for tinkering, but there are more reasons.
2.  Objectively, I do not find Windows inferior in setting up apps. On Linux, I am a hardcore terminal user and do not shy away from it at all. I’ve installed Arch multiple times through the terminal and Arch Wiki. However, on Windows, installing apps is better than people like to believe. The Windows Store, Winget Package Manager, and simply searching for apps on Google or Bing gives you access to an equal or greater set of apps and they all *work reliably*. On Linux, although it is nice to open your terminal and install popular apps in one command, it is not always that simple with version, availability, and permission issues. With disparities in distros, package managers and packaging formats, one can easily run into version and availability issues. Having to package apps for an increasing list of distros is incredibly wasteful. The various app standards are repetitive and confusing for new users. I know to use shared system-wide dependencies for most things and Flatpak for certain apps, but not everyone is clear with it. Users can just not care about these issues, but that generally leads to “dependency hell”, a problem. So it is not perfect, and more about getting used to either workflow. Simply put, I have gone full circle.
3.  The inequality of apps present for either platform is huge. No, using Open Source alternatives is not always the answer. I agree with the notion that pure libre distros and software is not a good idea. To be clear, I am not blaming anyone on the Linux side or making this into their problem. It’s not, but still, there is a clear reason to prefer Windows — using the best tools for the job — Microsoft Office, Adobe Suite, countless other professional apps, and thousands of games. For those involved in ahem, _privateering_, all those guides, cracks and activators exist for Windows. Giving it up and looking to alternative open-source programs doesn’t cut it for everyone. If I am going to be incredibly honest, this might the biggest reason.
4.  The UI of Windows 11 is simply incredible. Paired with a decent machine, it works well and looks great. But, I am proud to say that the Linux DE’s have caught up. Gnome 40 and KDE 5 are freaking amazing today. They are comparable to Windows, so it is an individual preference.
5.  Using Windows, my tech knowledge, know-how and troubleshooting skills are top notch. They are relevant to a much larger group of people. It is not about being the Tech Support person, although that does happen sometimes, and it’s alright, I am a natural problem solver. Knowing the depths of Windows and being able to play the latest games with my friends without worrying about the installation and compatibility of the latest apps and features, I would like to keep it that way. My expertise in technology goes beyond my own knowledge and journey; I am proud to play an active part in the Tech Cohort of our times. With that said, I would say that I am a very advanced user and easily fit into any talks about Linux in the general Tech Community.
6.  My device is on an active warranty. I need Windows if I run into problems with the hardware.
7.  Running Linux on Windows is much easier than the other way round. Microsoft has created an expansive ecosystem that runs Linux and Android software on Windows in a hassle-free way. WSL (Windows Subsystem for Linux) is a mature project and is suitable for development and testing of Linux. It provides the most seamless integration between the two operating systems. Also, I am not comfortable with using virtualization for the software exclusive to Windows if I were to use Linux. At least with my current hardware. If I had a balling PC, things would be different.
8.  It doesn’t affect my conscience using Windows. I am stoic on this matter. I keep myself clear from extreme views by telling myself to touch grass. It is good having opinionated software. Just my thoughts.
9.  For quite some time, the problems, inconveniences and disrupts regarding dual boot didn’t concern me much. Maybe, I just didn’t have much work. Anyways, what is expected from the Tech workflow of regular high schoolers. Now, I would happily use one OS.
10. Alright, rapid fire!! Not widespread adoption of Secure Boot, not easy Nvidia driver support on Non-Ubuntu based distros, Nouveau, systemd-boot, tons of kernel panics on Fedora (which broke my heart), the elitism around Linux and ricing being pointless and a colossal waste of time. Phew!

So in the end, I have my reasons. I’ll get back if I see fit. For now, I’ve gone full circle. Ciao!