---
title: Browsers
date: 2022-06-28
hero: /images/browser.png
excerpt: With the growth of the internet and rise of web apps, the browser has become the most used application on any computer. Modern web browsers are bridging the gap between operating systems thanks to their incredible cross-platform capabilities.
timeToRead: 6
authors:
  - Kavin Sood
---

With the growth of the internet and rise of web apps, the browser has become the most used application on any computer.

Modern web browsers are bridging the gap between operating systems thanks to their incredible cross-platform capabilities. For instance, I have less problems using MacOS or Linux since I would mostly use Chrome.

Your work will greatly benefit from knowing and using the right tool for the job. Therefore let’s consider the various browsers on the market and pick the right one for the job, which is browsing the web. Let’s detangle and make semblance of this chaotic mess!

Contenders: Chrome, Edge, Brave, Firefox, Safari, Vivaldi, Opera GX.

Before the in-depth comparison, we need to emphasize one point. Even though it would slowly be clear that no browser is perfect, every modern browser is suitably capable of doing their one job. Uniqueness is getting scarce.

## Chrome
*Ah, the most used browser in existence on every platform by a longshot.*

Pros:
* So, it just works. No, really. Every web developer optimises their sites for Chrome first.
* It’s really fast. Google has gifted the world with Chromium, which is now the most used browser backend engine. Chromium uses Blink and V8 - JavaScript and WebAssembly Engines, implementations of HTTPS and internal caching system. Chromium is also cross-platform. So, Chrome is pretty dang fast, and allows every other browser to also use its engine to be pretty fast for a coherent internet, which we can all respect.
* Sync is the best. Chrome has the best implementation of Account Browser Sync I have seen on a browser, and believe me, I have seen them all. It makes you feel right at home, very quickly and efficiently. Also, this feature seems to the best most buggy amongst browsers, even today, and is flawlessly smooth with Chrome.
Cons:
* Privacy Issues. Google is not a Tech Company, it is an advertising company. It is a data hemorrhage. While they do not sell data outside their organisation, Google having a lot of information about you isn’t great anyways. 
* On Mobile, I would rate Chrome pretty low in account of actual usage - web browsing. Modern websites are riddled with trackers and ads, and Chrome does nothing to help you.
* More on the point of Chrome not being on the side of consumers, Google likes to believe it knows better than you, constantly removing features and settings from new releases and having a walled garden approach unnecessarily. Chrome depreciated Manifest V2, in favor of V3. It is the next iteration of WebExtensions. The controversial change in this decision is the removal of blocking WebRequest. TL;DR - Adblocking extensions on Chrome, and as extension, all Chromium based browsers suffers. A wide outcry from the community of Adblock extension developers say this is a negative move severely decreasing the effectiveness of these extensions. Not to say that this move to V3 is entirely wrong, it is the lack of control placed in the user to decide for themselves. Firefox has done it right.
* Chrome also adds features which few people want and then removes flags to disable these features for the people who don't. Chrome removed the flags to hide the extensions cog wheel and side panel. It is incredibly annoying to see. Google has not left even the browser appearance in the hands of the user.
## Edge
*The truly better browser on Windows.*

Pros:
* Fantastic appearance. Everything about Edge when dialled in right looks great. The mica colors, address bar, wallpapers and videos and vertical tabs, everything is just *elegant*.
* This transitions great into the next point. Microsoft allows us to do this with their actual *better* settings and options. Collections, Math Solver, Shopping Assistant, Efficiency Mode and Immersive Reader are all great features to have. Even about, Security and Privacy, there are a lot of unique things about Edge. I appreciate the true innovation coming from a company like Microsoft.
* Faster than regular Chromium browsers including Chrome. Edge uses fewer resources, especially memory.
* It took a few updates, but Microsoft Edge has largely caught up with Chrome. While Chrome can sync themes and addresses and phone number information and Edge cannot, Microsoft’s browser otherwise matches Google’s syncing capabilities.
* Edge works really well with Microsoft’s own work services like OneDrive and Office. It is a matter of preference of services.
Cons:
* While true innovation and heated competition brings in users and customers like me, not everyone enters Microsoft’s ecosystem this way. The vast majority start using Edge because it is bundled with Windows and how hard Microsoft is playing to keep people using Edge. They are simply too aggressive in their tactics on keeping people on their platform. I do not appreciate the reminders periodically when I open Edge with a window which can’t be closed by pressing escape or clicking anywhere else, telling me to switch to Bing and use 'Microsoft’s Recommended Settings'. This does sway away some power users who are displeased to see such tactics.
* Edge Mobile's Adblock does not allow changing filter lists and uses the inefficient ABP extension. Oh, come on! You had such a great start!

## Brave
*The convenient privacy oriented browser.*

Initially, I was of the opinion that Brave is a browser for lazy people who either don’t know or can’t be bothered to install an Adblocker on their browser. I was right, but in 2016. Now, Brave has become somewhat of a beast. 

Pros:
* Most polished stripped-down iteration of Chrome. Chromium in itself is a raw project. Un-googled Chrome is not a reliable project either. Open Source as well!
* Great Ad-block with CNAME Blocking and Manifest V2 on latest Chromium.
* Brave works hard to oppose decisions by the top browsers that harm privacy. Its has strong AdBlock, Fingerprinting Protection, Script Blocking, and blocks third party cookies out of the box. Defaults do matter and Brave has it all sorted out. It supports features like AMP Page Redirection, TOR and IFPS which are great.
* Brave’s mobile version absolutely annihilates every other browser. Chrome on Mobile is dead to me. If you find yourself visiting rather scummy websites on mobile, Brave is the best tool you can use. It sterilises the browsing experience greatly on mobile, where screen real estate is dire and crucial.
Cons:
- Too much Crypto Stuff. Yes, Blockchain is cool, but I don’t want it anywhere near my browser. I don’t want to invest in crypto or dig deeper than I already know on the subject. The crypto features are a gimmick to me.
- I do not fancy the revenue model of Brave. I will not use BAT. Just another annoyance for me to remove every time I am setting up the browser. When visiting community support forums, BAT has by far the most issues. It’s good that the Brave team is starting to use other sources of revenue because I find the adblocking a crucial feature of Brave and will not see ads.
## Firefox
*The Monk, Lone Wolf and King.*
Firefox has been the true and oldest browser fighting for moral causes on the internet.
If not for anything else, Firefox needs to exist to not give Chromium full control over the market. The V100 update was really impressive and shows nothing but healthy competition.
Pros:
* Best browser for Linux distros.
* Open Source with a huge userbase of advanced users, thus, incredibly customisable. about:config is an impeccable and marvelous control panel.
* Lightweight due to not being based on Chromium. it uses the Gecko engine, incorporated from the learnings from the Servo Project, which was a rewrite from scratch of the browser engine written in Rust instead of C++ with improved concurrency, parallelism and reduced memory safety vulnerabilities.
* The backing of this company is just 
Cons:
* A part of the OG diehard Firefox users don’t like the ‘Proton’ design changes. The defaults 
* There is a noticeable difference in the JavaScript parsing between Firefox and Chromium. Going on a heavy page with a lot of CSS + JS magic ✨ makes Firefox lag. It is unfortunate but true.
## Safari
*The dying monopolistic browser.*

By majority opinion by the web developer community, Safari is become the old Internet Explorer. Safari is becoming the new IE 🙃.

Apple’s extremely locked down approach to browser engines bites them in the back. Having to use WebKit as the only browser engine on all platforms is one of the worst and most locked down decisions Apple has made. Furthermore, I am not on the Apple ecosystem so I have nothing much to say.

## Opera GX
_The surprisingly usable browser made for gamers._

It is no surprise that the gaming industry is at the bloody top of the entertainment industry in terms of revenue. Opera GX is a surprisingly practical rendition of that business opportunity.

Do not underestimate it, it is no stupid skin on Opera. It does have very useful features, but I must say, it’s appearance customisation options are comically ridiculous but unironically great.

Truly unique features include: Dark Mode Flag without reload, Auto PIP button on Chromium, free VPN, and of course, resource limiters.

I find a lot of the gaming features as not pertaining to my user case. The main problem is with Opera’s parent company. The company was acquired by a Chinese-based investor group in 2018 prior to its IPO and things have taken a turn for the worse since then. The company’s browser gross margins collapsed by 22.6% in just one year. It uncovered that Opera’s CEO “was recently involved in a Chinese lending business” and that Opera has started to make a “similar and dramatic pivot into predatory short-term loans in Africa and India”. According to Hindenburg, Opera generates “over 42% of the company’s revenue” from its short-term loan business.

## Vivaldi
_The opinionated and feature dense browser._

Out of laziness and mostly… laziness, I will not be covering this browser in detail.

It’s just not my jam, bro. A bit too much work to use and cover here 😩

# Definitions in Chrome
**A big reason to switch from Chrome is because of the lack of a load of features which are nicely integrated in Edge, Brave, Vivaldi and more**  
1. Reader Mode  
2. Tracker Blockers  
3. Collections  
4. Vertical Tabs  
5. Efficiency Mode  
6. Page Reader  
7. Shopping Assistant and Price Tracker  
8. Family Safety Features  
9. Integration with Microsoft 365  